<?xml version='1.0' encoding='ISO-8859-1'?>
<!DOCTYPE refentry PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.2//EN"
"http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd" [
  <!-- Fill in your name for FIRSTNAME and SURNAME. -->
  <!ENTITY dhfirstname "<firstname>Alexander</firstname>">
  <!ENTITY dhsurname   "<surname>Gall</surname>">
  <!-- Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage. -->
  <!ENTITY dhdate      "<date>August 29, 2007</date>">
  <!-- SECTION should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection other parameters are
       allowed: see man(7), man(1). -->
  <!ENTITY dhsection   "<manvolnum>8</manvolnum>">
  <!ENTITY dhemail     "<email>gall@switch.ch</email>">
  <!ENTITY dhusername  "Alexander Gall">
  <!ENTITY dhucpackage "<refentrytitle>DNS-CACHE-MONITOR</refentrytitle>">
  <!ENTITY dhpackage   "dns-cache-monitor">

  <!ENTITY debian      "<productname>Debian</productname>">
  <!ENTITY gnu         "<acronym>GNU</acronym>">
  <!ENTITY gpl         "&gnu; <acronym>GPL</acronym>">
]>

<refentry>
  <refentryinfo>
    <address>
      &dhemail;
    </address>
    <author>
      &dhfirstname;
      &dhsurname;
    </author>
    <copyright>
      <year>2007</year>
      <holder>&dhusername;</holder>
    </copyright>
    &dhdate;
  </refentryinfo>
  <refmeta>
    &dhucpackage;

    &dhsection;
  </refmeta>
  <refnamediv>
    <refname>&dhpackage;</refname>

    <refpurpose>monitor an instance of an anycast DNS cache</refpurpose>
  </refnamediv>
  <refsynopsisdiv>
    <cmdsynopsis>
      <command>&dhpackage;</command>

      <arg>
      <option>--check-interval
      <replaceable>interval</replaceable>
      </option>
      </arg>

      <arg>
      <option>--query
      <replaceable>query</replaceable>
      </option>
      </arg>

      <arg>
      <option>--name-server
      <group choice='plain'>
	<arg choice='plain'>bind</arg>
	<arg choice='plain'>unbound</arg>
      </group>
      </option>
      </arg>

      <arg>
      <option>--fail-threshold
      <replaceable>threshold</replaceable>
      </option>
      </arg>

      <arg>
      <option>--min-holddown
      <replaceable>minh</replaceable>
      </option>
      </arg>

      <arg>
      <option>--max-holddown
      <replaceable>maxh</replaceable>
      </option>
      </arg>

      <arg>
      <option>--logfile
      <replaceable>logfile</replaceable>
      </option>
      </arg>

      <arg>
      <option>--daemonize
      </option>
      </arg>

      <arg>
      <option>--pid-file
      <replaceable>pidf</replaceable>
      </option>
      </arg>

      <arg>
      <option>--mailto
      <replaceable>mailto</replaceable>
      </option>
      </arg>
      
      <arg rep='repeat' choice='plain'>
      <replaceable>addrspec</replaceable>
      </arg>	

    </cmdsynopsis>
  </refsynopsisdiv>
  <refsect1>
    <title>DESCRIPTION</title>

    <para>The <command>&dhpackage;</command> command checks whether an
    instance of an anycast DNS cache is working properly by monitoring
    the corresponding loopback interfaces and making periodic DNS
    queries that require resolution on external name servers.</para>

    <para>The monitoring process implements a finite state machine.
    The DNS cache is operational when all relevant interfaces are up
    and the name server is able to provide answers to the test
    queries.  When one of the interfaces goes down or the name server
    stops responding to the test queries, the process transitons to
    various states in which it tries to recover by reconfiguring
    interfaces or restarting the name server.</para>

    <para><replaceable>addrspec</replaceable> specifies an address and
    an interface to monitor in the form address/interface, for example
    130.59.31.248/lo:0 or 2001:620:0:FF::2/lo.</para>
  </refsect1>
  <refsect1>
    <title>OPTIONS</title>

    <para>These programs follow the usual &gnu; command line syntax,
    with long options starting with two dashes.</para>

    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <option>--help</option>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Show summary of options.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <option>--check-interval
	  <replaceable>interval</replaceable>
	  </option>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Interval in seconds between checks. Defaults to 4.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <option>--query
	  <replaceable>query</replaceable>
	  </option>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>DNS RRset to query in the form "Name:Type".  The RRset
          should have a TTL of 0 such that the cache is always forced
          to perform recursion.  This option can be specified multiple
          times.  Defaults to cache-mon-1.net.switch.ch.:TXT and
          cache-mon-2.net.switch.ch.:TXT</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <option>--name-server
	    <group choice='plain'>
              <arg choice='plain'>bind</arg>
	      <arg choice='plain'>unbound</arg>
            </group>
	  </option>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Select the type of name server to be used as cache.
	  Currently supported are bind (ISC) and unbound (NLNetLabs).
	  The default is bind.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <option>--fail-threshold
	  <replaceable>threshold</replaceable>
	  </option>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>When the monitoring process is trying to recover from
          a failure, it executes specific actions as part of the
          finite state machine.  After
          <replaceable>threshold</replaceable> consecutive actions
          have failed, the process suspends checking for
          <replaceable>minh</replaceable> seconds.  When it
          resumes checking but the next
          <replaceable>threshold</replaceable> actions fail as well,
          the holddown time is doubled and so forth, but the holddown
          time does not increase beyond
          <replaceable>maxh</replaceable> seconds.  The default
          <replaceable>threshold</replaceable> is 3.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <option>--min-holddown
	  <replaceable>minh</replaceable>
	  </option>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Minimum holddown time in seconds, see
          <option>--fail-threshold</option>.  The Default is 60.
	  </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <option>--max-holddown
	  <replaceable>maxh</replaceable>
	  </option>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Maximum holddown time in seconds, see
          <option>--fail-threshold</option>.  The Default is 7200.
	  </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <option>--log-file
	  <replaceable>logfile</replaceable>
	  </option>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Path to the file where state transitions and
          actions are written to.  The Default is
	  /var/log/bind/dns-cache-monitor.
	  </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <option>--daemonize
	  </option>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>
	    Detach from the controlling terminal and run in the
	    background.  If <replaceable>--logfile</replaceable> is specified,
	    standard input is redirected from /dev/null and standard
	    output and standad error are redirected to
	    <replaceable>logfile</replaceable>.  If
	    <replaceable>--logfile</replaceable> is not specified, all standard
	    in- and outputs are redirected from/to /dev/null.  This is
	    not recommended.
	  </para>
	  <para>
	    When this option is not specified, the process runs in the
	    foreground and the standard in- and outputs remain
	    unchanged.
	  </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <option>--pid-file
	  <replaceable>pidf</replaceable>
	  </option>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>
	    If <option>--daemonize</option> is specified, the process
	    ID is written to this file.  Defaults to
	    /var/run/&dhpackage;.
	  </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <option>--mailto
	  <replaceable>mailto</replaceable>
	  </option>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>
	    Reports of state changes are emailed to
	    <replaceable>mailto</replaceable>.  The default is
	    noc@switch.ch.
	  </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>
  <refsect1>
    <title>SEE ALSO</title>
  </refsect1>
  <refsect1>
    <title>AUTHOR</title>

    <para>This manual page was written by &dhusername; &dhemail; for
    internal usage by SWITCH but may be used by others.  Permission is
    granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the
    terms of the &gnu; General Public License, Version 2 any later
    version published by the Free Software Foundation.
    </para>
	<para>
	  On Debian systems, the complete text of the GNU General Public
	  License can be found in /usr/share/common-licenses/GPL.
	</para>

  </refsect1>
</refentry>
